# #02: Intermediate SQL

## SQL
Declarative query language for relational databases. It was originally developed in the 70s as part of the IBM **System R** project.
The name changeed in the 1980s to just **SQL** (Structured Query Language).

The language is comprised of different classes of commands:\
1) **Data Manipulation Language (DML)** : SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE statesments.
2) **Data Definition Language (DDL)** : Schema definitions for tables, indexes, views, and other objects.
3) **Data Control Language (DCL)** : Security, access controls.

## Joins
Combines columns from one or more tables and produces a new table.
### Example database used for lecture
> CREATE TABLE student (\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;sid INT PRIMARY KEY,\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;name VARCHAR(16),\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;login VARCHAR(32) UNIQUE,\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;age SMALLINT,\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;gpa FLOAT\
);\
\
CREATE TABLE course (\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;cid VARCHAR(32) PRIMARY KEY,\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;name VARCHAR(32) NOT NULL\ 
);\
\
CREATE TABLE enrolled(\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;sid INT REFERENCES student (sid),\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;cid VARCHAR(32) REFERENCES course (cid),\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;grade CHAR(1)\
);

> SELECT s.name\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; FROM enrolled AS e, student AS s\
    WHERE e.grade = 'A' AND e.cid = '15-721'\
    &nbsp; &nbsp; AND e.sid = s.sid;

## Aggregates
An aggregation function takes in a bag of tuples as its input and then produces a single scalar value as its output.\
Aggregate functions can (almost) only be used in a SELECT output list.

- AVG(COL) : The average of the values in COL
- MIN(COL) : The minimum value in COL
- MAX(COL) : The maximum value in COL
- COUNT(COL) : The number of tuples in the relation

Non-aggregated values in SELECT output clause must appear in GROUP BY clause.
> SELECT AVG(s.gpa), e.cid\
&nbsp; &nbsp; FROM enrolled AS e, student AS s,\
WHERE e.sid = s.sid\
GROUP BY e.cid;

The HAVING clause filters output results based on aggregation computation. This make HAVING behave like a WHERE clause for a GROUP BY.
> SELECT AVG(s.gpa) AS avg_gpa, e.cid\
&nbsp; &nbsp; FROM enrolled AS e, student AS s,\
WHERE e.sid = s.sid\
GROUP BY e.cid;\
HAVING avg_gpa > 3.9;

## String Operations
SQL standard says that strings are case sensitive and sing-quotes only. These are functions to mainipulate strings that can be used in any part of a query.

- Pattern Matcing: The LIKE keyword is used for string mathing in predicates.
    - "%" matches any aubstrings(including empty).
    - "_" matches any one character.
- Concatenation : Two vertical bars ("| |") will concatenate two or more strings together into a single string.

Patterns are case sensitive. That means uppercase characters do not match lowercase characters, or vice versa. 
- 'Intro%' matches any string beginning with "Intro".
- '%Comp%' matches any string containing "Comp" as a substring.
- '_ _ _'matches any string of exactly 3 characters.
- '_ _ _%' matches any string of at least 3 characters.
## Date and Time
- date : A calendar date containing a (four-digit)year, month, and day of the month.
- time : The time of day, in hours, minutes, and seconds. A varient, time(p), can be used to specify the number of fractional digits for seconds. It is also possible to store time-zone information along with the time by specifying **time with timezone**.

Date and time values can be specified like this;\
&nbsp; &nbsp;date '2018-04-25'\
&nbsp; &nbsp;time '09:30:00'\
&nbsp; &nbsp;timestamp '2018-04-25 10:29:01.45'\

To extract individual fields of a **date** or **time** value d, we can use **extract** (_filed_ from d), where _field_ can be one of year, month, day, hour, minute, or second. Time-zone information can be extracted using timezone_hour and timezone_minute.

## Output Redirection
Instead of having the result a query returned to the client (e.g., terminal), you can tell the DBMS to store the results into another table. you can then access this data in subsequet queries.
- New Table : Store the output of the query into a new (permanet) table.\
&nbsp;SELECT DISTINCT cid INTO CourseIds FROM enrolled;
- Existsing Table: Store the output of the query into a table that already exists in the database. The target table must have the same number of the columns with the same types as the target table, but the names of the columns in the output query do not have to match.
&nbsp;INSERT INTO CourseIds (SELECT DISTINCT cid FROM enrolled);

## Output Control
ORDER BY cluase with a LIMIT, the DBMS may producer different tuples in the result on each invocation of the query because the relational model does not impose an ordering.

## Nested Queries
Invoke queries inside of other queries to execute more complex logic within a single query. Nested queries are often difficutl to optimize.

### Nested Query Results Expressions:
- ALL : Must satisfy expression for all rows in sub-query
- ANY : Must satisfy expression for at least one row in sub-query.
- IN : Equivalent to = ANY()
- EXISTS : At least one row is returned

## Window Functions
Performs "sliding" calculation across a set of tuples that are related. Like an aggregation but tuples are not grouped into a single output tuple.\

**Funtions** : The window function can be any of the aggregation functions that we discussed above. There are also special window functions:\
1. ROW_NUMBER : The number of the current row.
2. RANK : The order position of the current row.

**Grouping** : The OVER clause specifies how to group together tuples when computing the window function. Use PARTITION BY to specify group.
> SELECT cid, sid, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY cid)\
&nbsp; FROM enrolled ORDER BY cid;

We can also put an ORDER BY within OVER to ensure a deterministic ordering of results even if database changes internally.
> SELECT *, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (ORDER BY cid)\
&nbsp; FROM enrolled ORDER BY cid;

## Common Table Expressions
CTEs are an alternative to windows or nested queries when writing more complex queries. They provide a way to write auxiliary statements for user in a larger query. CTEs can be thought of as a temporary table that is scoped to a single query.

The WITH clause binds the output of the inner query to a temporary result with the name.

